

# In Search of Afro-Brazilian Data Justice
---

In his seminal work Being Digital (1994), Nicholas Negroponte discussed some interesting ideas that, from the perspective of our current development, seem to reveal the idealistic vision we had back in the 1990s. Digitization, Negroponte argued at the time, is a general process of going from atoms to bits. From basic information, to water, to complex interactions and elements that make our humanity, our identities and our values, everything was likely to be transformed to units of information that would be codified and decodified by computers. In that sense, computing, Negroponte continues, “is not about computers but about living” (6). This powerful statement renders the importance of the digital for Negroponte as well as the implications it would have and continues to have for our lives and actions. If we thought, at some point, that computer scientists, communication experts and engineers among others were centered around the development of machines and non-human entities, Negroponte makes us reconsider that idea. Computing, then, is about humans, about human lives and how their interactions with computational devices and structures (e.g., computers, cable networks, software, etc.) impact the way we understand humanity. This means that humanists, social scientists and human users and practitioners have much to say in order to define how computing should be.
            Following the same line of thought, Negroponte argued that, although he was aware that computing was about living, computing industry needed to develop further to overcome challenges in the process of interaction between machines and humans. “The challenge for the next decade” –continued Negroponte— “is not just to give people bigger screens, better sound quality (…). It is to make computers that know you, learn about your needs, and understand verbal and non-verbal languages” (92). In this case, Negroponte was predicting and trying to draw a path forward for computing and for the computing industry that has always been interested and centered around the possibility of making autonomous and “intelligent” machines. We all know how the story goes and how Negroponte’s predictions went beyond what he could foresee: computers listening to us even if we don’t want; increasing use of artificial intelligence and algorithms to predict who we are, what we want and how would humans behave in certain circumstances; use of digital technology to criminalize dissent and to surveil; predictive machines to extend what Ruha Benjamin has called the “New Jim Code” or the private carceral system replicated by machines and digital infrastructures; implementation of technology and particularly digital technology in the food industry to modify crops and seeds without knowing the end result; endless extraction of data and information from every human being even if they are not connected to a digital device, etc.
            In her acceptance speech, Nobel Peace Prize 2021, Maria Ressa stated that “what happens in social media does not stay in social media” (Democracy Now 10 Dec), referring to the January 6 attack of right wing extremists to Capitol Hill in Washington D.C. “Online violence is real-world violence” continued Ressa; “Social media is a deadly game for power and money…highly profitable marketing operations are engineered to structurally undermine human will…a behavior modification system” (Democracy Now Dec 10). These statements highlight some important elements to discuss. First, Ressa describes, like Negroponte, the connection between computation and what she calls “real-world.” If we accept that computational is about living, we need also to accept with Ressa that computation impacts living in both positive and very negative ways; that the purported neutrality and uncontaminated state of technology, digital technology and particularly social networks is just an illusion. Second, Ressa’s speech makes us aware that the issue is not only the connectedness between digital and the analog world, which are in fact connected because the digital is all the way material as we have discussed before (Arriaga & Villar 2021). The problem is the unethical human intervention and design of machines and systems that are employed to replicate and disseminate oppressive values, to perpetuate systems of exploitation based on colonial conceptions. As the Nobel Prize laureate proposes, the problem is how those machines, that Negroponte rendered autonomous or looking for certain autonomy, are used and programmed in a way that turn humans and other living entities into sources of information from which corporations extract and monetize information. The third element highlighted by Ressa’s speech is the dramatic changes experienced by our world. If Nobel Peace Prizes were previously awarded to politicians and activists devoted to solve conflicts and mediate in armed battles, now the turn is for a journalist fighting fake news, disinformation and digital warfare from the ground but also through computation, through social networks and through diverse media. All this new order confirms what mathematician Cathy O’Neil has argued in saying that algorithms and digital tools have become “weapons of math-destruction.”
            Although Negroponte and Ressa describe, in certain sense, the intimate and important bond between machines and human beings, they do so from different perspectives: the former looks at that relationship from the idyllic and promising position of the 1990’s boom of the internet; the latter, however, sees the relationship from a more critical and demoralizing perspective that resulted from years of academic research, whistle blowers from tech corporations, and cases such as those of Edward Snowden, Wikileaks and Cambridge Analytica, to name but a few. Ressa has campaigned and worked to showcase how communities in locations like the Philippines are affected by the way digital tools are used. However, she carries her actions because she has a bigger platform and has been able to connect with diverse stakeholders at a global scale. But, what do people and communities that do not have such a big platform do to challenge data and algorithmic determinism? What strategies do communities and regular people employ to challenges discourses such as big data and digital determinism that create images of them and their territory that, more often than not, strip them from their autonomy?
            This book aims to answer these and other related questions, trying to understand the way these technological and data centered discourses and practices are put into question from a human-scale and communitarian perspective. In concrete, the book will pay attention to the case of Afro-Brazilian communities and groups that, for a long time now, have been reflecting about the digital, the use of data and the possibilities their inventive communities have to both become part of the so called global digital economy and, at the same time, propose new visions to understand that economy from a multi-perspective vision. In order to achieve this book’s goals, there are several concepts that need to be considered and discussed, and which will serve as base for the development of the analyses, observations, and experiments carried out throughout. Some of the concepts are: 1) entanglement as a fundamental concept to understand not only how the members of these communities connect to each other, but also how the studied communities connect with communities in other locations and with the environment that include human and non-human entities; 2) Algorithmic identity as the type of identity construction that is algorithmically imposed and, that in the case of the Afro-Brazilian communities we are studying, are defied by interconnections with both a distributed blackness (Brock 2019), and with what we have called “Afro-Latinx digital connections” (Arriaga & Villar 2021); 3) Datification as the process of a digital and data neo-liberal capitalism, in which the discourses, practices and conception of data and digital technologies as neutral, transparent, objective and more than human are imposed over human communities, and particularly, black communities; 4) Data Justice must be understood as creative process of resistance and reflection through which diverse subjects and communities start questioning datification through a re-conceptualization of technology, data, objectivity, etc. In the case of this book, we will discuss how Afro-Brazilian communities develop processes of interconnection that we will call “Community data networks” in search of what Treré (2021) has defined as “data justice”. In the following section we will explore each of the above-mentioned conceptions to understand how this book engages with them and, at the same time, becomes entangled and part of those Afro-Latinx and Afro-Brazilian community data networks.        
Entanglement as Point of Departure to a Digital Ecology from Below
Going back to Negroponte, when he discusses the digital as a cultural turn, it seems as if our concrete reality, our materiality was losing terrain. Back in the 1990’s this media and computer science scholar discussed eagerly how everything we touched was potentially transformed into units of information called bits: this is, everything was potentially open to be digitized. These units, argued Negroponte, were more fluid and complex than atoms, generating therefore more complexity and interconnects in our interactions. Based on those ideas, one can extrapolate that what Negroponte is dismissing from the consideration of the digital world is its materiality. He manages to use several examples to illustrate his point, from the famous Evian water example and its painful transportation from France into an American meeting about the American computing industry, to the idea of saying that a computer whose material market value was less than $2,000 would cost more than two million dollars because of the bits of information it contains. The materiality, from the perspective of Negroponte, seems to be seen as a step back in the evolution of culture as well as in our human evolution that, in the mind of Silicon Valley technologists, is driven towards the idea of singularity and independence of material elements.
Although Negroponte considers the interconnection of computers and computation, bringing to the fore the idea of ecology, media ecology or digital ecology, his perspective overlooks several elements that we will consider of importance throughout this book. Once of such concepts is the idea of entanglement (Hodder, 2011). This concept entails the co-dependency between things and humans. Not only human-made things but also natural things that, up to certain extent, define, influence and impact our existence. In the context of communities using technologies that weren’t planned or designed for them as proposed by André Brock (???), this idea becomes much more powerful. The relationship between Black communities in the case of this book and algorithmic, computational and digital technology could not be seen as one directional. Much has been said about the implications of technology imposition, surveillance, algorithmic determinism, etc., and our book looks at those problems but without essentializing neither the human groups using the technology nor the technology.
Throughout the book we will bring the idea of ecology to the center of the discussion to understand how these communities are not, anymore, passive receptors of innovation but, become innovators who challenge the way practices are carried out around given technologies. If we accept with Nardi and O’Day (1999) that information ecology and for extension technological ecology must be understood as “a system of people, practices, values, and technologies in a particular local environment”, then the idea of entanglement acquires additional value.  The communities studied in this book, then, get entangled with digital and algorithmic technologies through processes of appropriation, repurposing and interconnection with other innovative practices that are seen as less efficient, that dwell in the terrain of the analog and the traditional, but whose use and application re-configure the way they interact with tools that are purported as neutral and objective. Thus, we will pay particular attention to categories such as entanglement and ecology as lenses to understand the dynamic interrelation between actors, practices, and objects (platforms, digital objects, algorithms, discourses, applications, etc.). In that sense, we look at the discursive connections and appropriation, but we also give a central place to processes in which the body gets entangled with discursive, digital, and algorithmic structures to make new practices and new visions emerge. In that sense, what media scholars have defined as pure media ecology becomes a much more complex reality when seeing it from the perspective of entanglement and the interconnection between these three realms. Digital ecology is not disconnected from a natural ecology. On the contrary, they are very much ingrained and the communities and projects that get entangled to what we have called “Afro-Brazilian community networks” are aware. They use those digital entanglements to rethink the body politics that have defined them and classified their existence, the territory as a living piece of their identity, and their practices as valuable and valid actions in a digital global economy that tends to erase what is different or looks antiquated. Thus, these communities and networked initiatives re-think their humanity and the role human beings play in our world in the sense proposed by Achielle Mbembe (2015).    
Afro-Latinx Digital connections and Distributed Blackness
            Media Scholar John Cheney-Lippold (2018) has masterfully discussed the power of algorithms and its influence in the development of our current identities. He proposes that “we are data” meaning that those images generated about ourselves and that are wandering around through digital networks depend on “a data-based model of what it means to be ‘man’, ‘woman’, ‘gay’, ‘straight’, ‘old’, ‘young’, ‘African American’” (10). In that sense, our identities as social agents connected to certain groups and, identity markers and traditions may be blurred by the way technology and digital technological discourses and practices represent and come to the game of identity. This process of data representation and algorithmic design of identities perpetuates stereotypes and injustices that affect communities historically racialized, marginalized and discriminated against. Authors such as Safiya Umoja Noble with her seminal work Algorithms of Oppression (2018), Ruha Benjamin with Race After Technology (2019), or XXX have demonstrated the effect of technologies in Black communities and communities of color, who are, in the long run, more affected because of the social structural entanglement of technologies. Throughout the book we will incorporate some of the concepts developed by these authors and consider their connection to and validity in global contexts in which conceptions of race become more complex and entangled.
            Looking at the Afro-Brazilian or Black-Brazilian communities that take part in the so called “community data networks”, it is important to start discussing some concepts to understand how they engage a discourse of data and digital resistance from an ethnic racial perspective. Black digital identity is one of those concepts that we will be discussing in connection with the way Black Brazilian communities engage multiple forms of identity and belonging. André Brock, in his important work about African American Cybercultures, points out how identity should be considered as “the tension between the self and the social” (21). In that sense, his vision of Black digital identity has to do with the tensions between “the digital as an avatar of white technical expertise and Black sociality, performativity, and agency” (21). In order to investigate the way these communities enter a world that has not been designed for their existence, it is important to study the contexts in which those tensions and social constructions take place. Brock, for instance, goes back to WEB DuBois’s concept of “double consciousness” to show how “Black folk have long had to manage cultural multiplicity in a cultural context collapsed of white supremacist ideology” (24).
When it comes to Black Brazilian communities, one has to go back to the myth of racial democracy as proposed by American sociologist Frank Tannenbaum in his Slave and Citizen: The Negro in the Americas (1947). Such an idea, that has been debated from diverse scientific, political, activist and cultural perspectives, reveals how racial relations in the United States have played a central role in defining and understanding racial, ethnic and cultural relations in the Americas. Brazil and Latin America at large were seen (by Tannenbaum) as a racial paradise just because there was not institutionalized racism like in the United States. However, this does not mean that the region was free of racism and discrimination. In fact, the way racism worked in Latin America is represented by the image of the mulatto as separated race with possibilities of social mobility (Pattillo 19): the idea is not to create just an institutional structure that forces Black communities to go away, but to create an everyday network of psychological, emotional, economic, political and cultural practices, among others, to completely disappear these communities and replace them by better and more lights skinned races. Black Brazilian scholar and activist Abdias Do Nascimento stated recognized that “Brazilian society closed the avenues through which black may have survived (…). They created a fabric of slogans about equality and racial democracy that has served to assuage the bad national conscience. Abroad, it presents our country as a model of racial coexistence; internally, the myth is used to keep blacks tricked and docile” (Nascimento, “The Myth” 380). What Nascimento describes could be applied to any temporal frame and any nation, but it really resonates with the way contemporary advertisement, digital technologies and algorithmic cultures behave: they create socially engaged and inclusive slogans, but their deep structures are designed in a way that they constraint and exclude bodies, cultures and communities that do not match the ideal of white technical expertise and future thinking.
Going back to Brock’s idea of Black digital practice in the American culture, it is possible to state that Black Brazilian culture is not only defined by that idea of double conscience in which blackness seems to be the opposite of the ideal citizen. In addition to that opposition, Black Brazilian and Black Latin American communities at large embrace a multiplicity of identities and temporalities that encompasses, among others, the nation, the region and the continent. In fact, these communities emerge from the tensions between multiple races in the national context, as well as the tensions at transnational levels and in connection with colonial, neo-colonial and global colonial surveillance agendas. If we bring technology and digital technology into the mix, understanding that technology (particularly computers) “recreates practices, people, and even environments through virtuality” (Brock 21) we will be able to argue that Black Brazilian and Black Latin American digital identity emerge from the tension between individuals, communities, algorithms, software, hardware and the social, cultural and economic constraints to access and use these elements. This is exactly what Brock has termed as distributed Blackness based on an everyday practice. Although, the distribution of Blackness that our book aims to point out adopts a Global South perspective in which the studied communities reclaim their humanity through an appropriation of data justice practices. 
The notion of a community data network is especially connected with how particular groups use digital tools to stake their claim on the production and oversight of data. A community data network is a constellation of people, digital devices, and the geographic, social, and cultural characteristics that define the uniquely constrained situation of a particular group of people. In short, community data networks encompass an understanding of infrastructure as a broad entanglement beyond the digital tools, networks, and data that seem to define it.

